The New Method for Electric Guitar Performance: an Introduction.

Prelude.

The book that follows is the result of years of performance and pedagogy; through the learning I've integrated,
the lessons I've ruminated and reflected upon, and careless injuries suffered, this new method has arrived. 

It is true that many a great guitarist have lived their musical lives without the aid of formal lessons 
or method books - some have argued that their musical output, being 'free' of formal strictures ended up being raw,
untamed, rebellious. Whether or not that has been the case is beyond the scope of this method. I approach the writing of this little book and the establishment
of these ideas not as some sort of correction or academic pursuit. Rather, it is because I feel strongly that the electric guitar, specifically, is under-theorized
and under-developed in terms of its pedagogical tradition and methodology. Other instruments within the Western system have a longer history both in terms of
their existence within the culture, and in their pedagogical theorizing. Put more simply: teachers and students of other instruments enjoy a much more thorough
and carefully considered approach to their instruments. 

This first iteration of this method is not intended to be an absolute beginner's first method book. Rather, it is laid out topically, examining parts of 
the body and their best-possible integration with the instrument. By the end of the book, it should be clear that playing the guitar involves the entire body
working with synchronicity and with the least possible effort. 

Every topic in this book, every exercise, every technical examination is based upon an encompassing concept: fundamental motion. Fundamental motion, or 'primordial'
motion, as I am apt to call it, refers simply to the anatomical fact that the human body has evolved to favor and emphasize certain motions. These motions, 
being fundamental, are part of our physiological heritage, our basic construction; to move against them risks injury, pain, and loss of time playing our instruments.
I have not known another teacher to discuss approaching the electric guitar with this basic rule in mind, though the development of this method is heavily indebted
to the wisdom I've received studying with Dr. Philip Alejo, Professor of Double Bass at the University of Arizona, Tucson. 

The lessons I received focused almost entirely on the most basic exercises; creating a strong and responsive sound, tracing and planning motions, integrating 
ever-more muscle groups, all with the most minimal of efforts. Rather than focusing effort upon physical exertion, the effort was instead turned toward 
self-examination; the teacher must assist the student in becoming more self-aware and constructively critical in their observation and execution. That is to say,
if one is to "get good," the first step must be to learn how to analyze the technical challenge at hand, and address the root concern with fundamental motion.
It is my core belief that ALL technical challenges on the instrument can be surmounted through the careful and directed use of self-produced exercises that 
pinpoint the fundamental motion necessary to the problem. 

In line with this thinking, we must consider that the primary goal of this book's underlying pedagogy and philosophy is to lead the student to a self-awareness 
that in turn functions to produce new exercises, insight, and approaches to technical challenges faced by the student. Perhaps then, similar to Kodály, this 
may be less of a method from the strict definition of technics and perhaps more akin to the development of a theory or philosophy of kinesthetics. The exercises I
describe in this text should then be thought of as examples of the philosophy at work; students should derive their own simple exercises from the music they are
engaging with, and the technical challenges therein. I do not maintain that the exercises I have composed for this book are sacrosanct or even necessarily perfectly
suited to a possible set of challenges - they are not just examples, but letters to home by a soujouner seeking the connected-ness of all things.


What Are Fundamental Motions?

As discussed in this text's prelude, a fundamental motion is a gesture that is evolutionarily selected and optimized. Our physical development, taking place over
countless generations, has grown and honed our bodies to move advantageously; fundamental motions are said to be 'selected' and 'optimized' as they provided the means for necessary
work and survival. While this text is too short for a full accounting of humanity's physical evolution, it is worth noting that these fundamental motions are by
no means new - they have been with us for quite some time! As musicians, we tend to, at best, take these motions for granted. At worst, we may even confuse these
abilities with delimiting constraints, issues that hobble and maim our imagined ability to interface with our instruments. I encourage you, dear reader, to imagine
these basic capabilities as part of our unique and great heritage as human beings!

You already perform fundamental motions - you've performed them today, the day before, and still yet the days before that! If you wish to see a fundamental motion
in action, begin with one of these simple exercises:

1. Pick up a glass of water from a table or countertop. 
2. Pick up a pencil from a flat surface.
3. Pick up a pencil or pen from a holder, where the pencil or pen faces upward.
4. Throw a ball.
5. Throw a frisbee.
6. Turn a doorknob or handle.
7. Scratch your belly.
8. Pick up a plate or dish.
9. Turn a key in a lock.
10. Wave to someone.
11. Press a button.

In each of these simple examples, you have performed what we are electing to call a fundamental motion. These gestures are simple and often done without thought -
no contortion or alteration to our basic form is necessary. 

It would be correct to counter - aren't these objects already designed for ease of use? Indeed, they have been designed around our basic shared physiology. Try this:
attempt to do one of the above activities, going out of your way to form your hand, or move your arm, or structure your fingers differently (though without hurting yourself). 

You likely noticed that the activity you undertook became more difficult using less-than-optimal technique. In this case, we have substituted some other motion in place of our fundamental,
advantageous motion. Let us ask ourselves: do all objects in our reach reveal how we should interface with them? 

This would be a cornerstone of ergonomic design. Not every object is as forthcoming - musical instruments in particular require a careful consideration of their construction
and materials before revealing their fundamental-motion affordances for interfacing. Put more simply, we have to examine, carefully, the opportunities on the instrument for us
to use our fundamental motions to our better health and musical advantage. 

As mentioned previously, it is one of the primary points of this book that any and all technical challenges may be broken down to their simplest, most fundamental motions;
that the most direct method toward mastery of technique/passage/piece/song is to:

1. identify the problem. Do not speed through the passage.
2. Attempt to play the passage very slowly, but in the process, pay more attention to the body: are each of your motions fundamentally advantageous? Can they be immediately
related to some aspect of the human physique's evolutionary heritage? 
3. Break the troublesome passage into its most basic building blocks musically, paying special attention, again, to the body. Focus slowly on one motion and only add
others once the first is moving smoothly and succinctly.
4. These self-observations and self-produced exercises should be completed with an almost meditative observational quality; there is no criticism, only streamlining toward
complete control and smoothness of motion.


It will be seen to be often necessary to set down the instrument and perform the fundamental motion required for the passage. Often, we find that the instrument begins to instruct our bodies, rather than the inverse; are we playing the guitar, or is the guitar playing us? By setting down the instrument and performing fundamental motions with mundane, everyday objects or “air-guitar-motioning,” we may approach the more direct truth of how our body wishes to move rather than the guitar dictating the motion. 

This sort of thinking seems to run against many players’ approach on the instrument. It may be countered: picking up cups, turning keys, and turning doorknobs never made me a better guitarist! But this counterpoint misses the larger point of fundamental motions; they are illustrative of our bodies’ optimized affordances for motion - it is easier for us to move in some ways than others. With this line of thinking, we use the ergonomic design of everyday objects to remind and reinforce our bodily interfacing with more complex objects such as guitars. 


As you proceed reading this book and completing its exercises, keep these aforementioned steps in mind - they form the basis of the method and its necessary work toward mastery of the instrument, and of the self. 


How to Use this Book

It is recommended that students first engaging with this text practice and perform the exercises contained within, but then, as previously stated, use the approach
to develop their own exercises designed to smooth and control fundamental motions. Again, simple completion of a given exercise is not the point. The journey itself,
deconstructing and reconstructing exercises themselves in pursuit of relaxation, total control, and effortless accuracy is itself the path and the proper execution
of the exercise. 

Many of the exercises begin with an examination of fundamental gesture. Readers are encouraged to imitate the gestures, literally, physically - they are the entryway to understanding fundamental motion.

Follow the tempo guides carefully, and -take seriously- the reflection prompts at the end of each exercise. To gloss over the reflection throws out
the focused execution of the exercise. To execute the exercises without focus and intention is a futile gesture. 

((((what is the plan for the exercises themselves? Each one is introduced and given a simple name. Make a short write up in bullet points. The exercise is written
in both notation and tablature with a video link. Sometimes, they don't need specific notation, but a step by step description. The reflection points are highly important:
what are students supposed to focus on? Brief reflection should be done at the end of each exercise, following certain procedures - that is, the order of the prompts 
should lead the student to making the appropriate connections and revelations throughout the process... ))))









Seated Position.

This method begins with an examination of the seated position. In order for us to realize the full potential of our arms, hands, and fingers, with must firstly ensure
that our body is best supporting them. We must act from a position of balance and strength.

The guitarist is to be seated at the edge of a chair. The chair should be at an ideal height, so that the student's legs extend out straight from the seat to form a
virtually 90 angle at the knee. Feet should be slightly greater than shoulder length apart with the soles flat on the floor. The spine should be tall with its natural
S-curve at the lower part of the back, balanced and strong sitting atop the pelvis that is angled slightly forward. From this position, the student should feel balanced,
able to stand at a moment's notice, and thoroughly unlikely to be pushed over by a strong gust of wind. 

The guitar is to be secured to the body near the middle of the torso with a strap (strap-locks/washers are mandatory) with the lower bout of the guitar resting between the student's legs. The neck of the guitar
will then be pointed to the ceiling at a 45-55 degree angle from the student's body. This setup may remind some students of the classical guitar seated position, though
with one difference: the guitar may touch the tops of the student's legs, but will not be rested upon them. It is absolutely necessary that the student's posture by upright
and supported for the guitar to sit properly on the torso without dragging the body or causing injury. For those using heavier guitars, particular focus should be given to
maintaining the support from the core to maintain an upright posture. 

The positioning of the guitar in this seated position is intended to reproduce the position of the guitar in the standing position. Naturally, it is expected that the player
will continue to focus on supportive, upright posture when standing. From your seated position, try standing. The guitar should remain in precisely the same position between your seated and standing position.
This is another focus of the method; reproducability. By maintaining the same guitar position in the seated and standing position, the player will effectively eliminate 
the introduction of additional variables into the performance process. The mapping of the guitar with the body will be strengthened through correct repetition without 
guesswork. 

Consider: the approach to playing an instrument here follows the scientific method. We wish for each experiment to be run in an identical fashion, or as close as possible. 
Through this pursuit, we are making stronger and longer-lasting relationships throughout our neurology; the hands, arms, eyes, ears, and brain are in a sync that can be
repeated at will. 




The Right Hand.

The right hand deserves special consideration and attention as, with rare exception, initiates the sound. It has often been the case that methods, videos, and instructional materials have spent considerable time focusing on the left hand; indeed, even our impulse is to focus on the movement and articulations of the left hand, as if the essence of the performance is held in the left hand.

This method presumes the use of a pick. We will begin by constructing a theory of the pick.

Pick Cradle.

It is recommended to use a heavy pick, > 1.5mm in thickness. Choose a pick with a prominent logo or design. Follow these steps to arrive at the pick cradle:

Grasp the very tip of the pick with your left hand, holding the pick in place while we set our fingers.

Lay your right hand thumb directly across the logo on the pick so that the edge of the thumb runs perpendicular to the tip of the pick (with your thumb forming a 90 degree angle with an imaginary line bisecting the pick from the tip). 

The right hand’s index and middle finger will now be added along the underside of the pick for support. 

Important. The pointer and middle fingers’ point of contact will be at an angle. The pointer finger’s tip will point parallel to the tip of the pick, with the center of the pad touching the edge of the pick, though with slightly more of the pad underneath the pick. The middle finger will be under the opposite edge of the pick, but with the index-finger-side edge of the finger in contact with the pick. ((Imagine you are handing someone a piece of paper, grasping the paper with these same three fingers. This motion feels quite natural, perhaps somewhat instinctual. 
Remove the helping grasp of the left hand. If the cradle is executed properly, the pick should feel as though it is balanced between the three right hand fingers. It should feel as though you may drop the pick if its tip is pointed toward the ground. There should only be a small amount of point sticking out. 


From this position, as odd as it may possibly feel to you, we have complete control over the pick using motions amongst those three fingers that feel very natural. 

At no point will the index or middle finger become flattened against the underside of the pick. In line with the theory of fundamental motion, the fingers retain their ability to work together, in concert, when they are rounded rather than flat. The interplay
amongst the three fingers allows the pick to be adjusted (in tiny motions) if necessary. More importantly, the three-finger contact, with rounded fingers, allows the player to play with greater dynamic contrast. 

Initial Exercises.


Exercise 1.

We will begin by establishing this pick cradle as our default pick hold. Make the pick cradle, and then allow the pick to fall down into your palm. With careful observation, grasp the pick once more and repeat the creation of the pick cradle, paying special attention to the proper positioning of the fingers. The pick should feel, each time you make the cradle, as if it could fall from your fingers at any moment. Allow the pick to be balanced between its three points of contact. Repeat this process many times. It is recommended that you allow your hand to shake out, stretch, or do something different periodically. This habit will be formed through periodic repetition.

Exercise 2. 

With the pick cradled comfortably amongst the three fingers, turn your wrist, making the pick’s point turn from a flat, horizontal plane, to point down at the floor. It is okay to drop the pick by accident. As you turn, keep the cradle relaxed - resist an urge to “clamp” on the pick. Observe carefully: the pick’s point flips down, creating an arc as it points at the floor. Visualize, as you turn the wrist, the formation of this arc in the air. Could you picture the motion of the pick as if your body was suddenly invisible? Repeat this wrist-turning motion, taking care to retain the softness and relaxation of the pick cradle throughout the entirety of the stroke.

Exercise 3.

For this exercise, we will be creating pick motion with the fingers. Imagine that you are feeling the texture of fabric, or running sand/salt between your fingers. With the pick between the fingers, your fingers will not move past one another, but will be engaged against  the pick with the same motion. This rubbing, an optimized, fundamental motion, allows the pick to rotate. Keeping the wrist still, we can carefully observe the arc of the pick’s rotation. While it is less dramatic than the arc of the wrist turning, it will be an important gesture to allow the pick the ability to turn, passing thru the string. For now, get used to manipulating the pick with the fingers in isolation. Gradually introduce small wrist motions with the finger motions. 

Observation: These two gestures, the wrist-turn and the finger-rub, allow the pick to move and rotate along two axises. To feel these motions, pretend that your left hand index finger is a string. Perform these exercises again, but with the point of the pick pressed lightly against the pad of your left hand index finger. What do you notice? Pay attention, using the haptic feedback from your left hand finger, the subtlety of the pick’s motion against your skin when performing these exercises with varying speed and intensity. 





The Left Hand.

The left hand has a tendency to attract undue attention and undue tension; these exercises are intended to move our preparation toward a place of relaxation and leverage. 

Fundamental Motion 1.

Sitting upright, in alignment, allow your left arm to hang, fully relaxed. Pay attention to your breath and draw your attention to the weight of your arm as it hangs. 

In a controlled motion, left the hand and forearm from the elbow, keeping the upper arm (near the shoulder) stationary. Turn your wrist so that your palm faces the ceiling. Continue to allow your shoulder and hand to remain in a relaxed, neutral position. Allow the lower part of the arm to fall back to its original position. Repeat these steps in smooth, slow, controlled motions.

Fundamental Motion 2.

With your forearm and hand lifted, they should form an 80-90 degree angle with your upper arm. Pull your forearm straight back, as if being pulled from the point of your elbow. Resist the urge to tense or roll the hand as you move. The shoulder should not move - it should merely allow the motion with no added tension. Pay attention to the feeling of your back muscles becoming engaged and then disengaged as you repeat this step, returning to this exercises’s starting position. When your motions are smooth and you are feeling aware of the motion, combine these two exercises into a compound exercise, again, keeping the motions smooth and controlled. 

Fundamental Motion 3.

Begin the third motion with your hand and forearm lifted, making the 80-90 degree angle between at the elbow. From this position, rotate your arm, bringing your hand to your stomach. Your arm should be rotating from the elbow - keep the shoulder down and relaxed. Rotate the arm in the other direction, as if throwing a frisbee, or serving a plate of food at an elegant restaurant. During this motion, the elbow may lift out from the side of the body - this is fine. Again, the shoulder is present only to facilitate the rotation, but not to add any tension. Repeat the motion, slowly, observing carefully the arc of the rotation.

Fundamental Motion 4. 

Now, combine the pulling and rotation into one motion. Vary the speed and location of the pull and rotation. What do you observe? Now, the motion of the elbow becomes more apparent. It should be clear now that the freedom and motion of the elbow is essential to the free movement and rotation of the arm. As a result, we will keep this rotating elbow as we engage with the guitar.

With the Guitar.

Taking the guitar in the seated position, upright and aligned, place your fingers against the strings freely, not pressing on any particular fret. Aim for the middle of the fretboard, somewhere around the 7th fret. Keep the fingers rounded, with the tip and some pad touching the strings (again, the specific strings do not matter right now). Keep the thumb disconnected. Your hand should be open in the middle, as if holding a ping-pong ball. Relax the hand as much as you’re able.

With this configuration, pull the left arm back engaging the back muscles. The guitar will pull back with the arm, but your right arm, resting against the body, will keep the guitar in place.  The guitar is essentially balanced at four points of contact: The left knee/thigh, the right knee/thigh, the right mid-arm, and the left hand. Importantly, the legs are holding the guitar UP, while the arms and hands are keeping it balanced through their engagement. 

While these exercises are leading us toward a more relaxed left hand, this point is imperative: in order to maximize our control over the instrument, we must keep these points of contact in balance, not allowing the hands to hold up the guitar in any way. We should be able to balance the guitar between the strap and the legs, and then stabilize the guitar against the body with these light points of manual, handed, contact. 

[illustration?]

Application 1.

This application of fundamental motion will engage with the string. Select the A, D, or G string, and depress the string at the 7th fret. Keep the thumb free and away from the neck. The wrist will be neutral with no curvature. As a result, it may feel as though the hand is “turned” and the pointer finger knuckles are facing toward the headstock rather than straight out from the neck. More on this later.

Now, with the finger attached to the string, pull back on the string, pulling the string itself into the fretboard. If done correctly, the neck of the guitar will pull slightly back. The guitar will not be pulled out of alignment due to the resting weight of the right arm on the body. This may seem difficult at first, but it will become easier once we engage our back muscles and pull the left arm back as the pointer finger stays relatively curved with the point and some of the pad engaging the string.

As a consequence, the pointer finger is not really pushing the string or pulling it against the counter-pressure of the thumb. The fingers need only to maintain enough basic tension to remain upright and channel the weight of the arm and back muscles pulling the string into the neck. Repeat this pulling on different strings and with different fingers. 

Observe and Consider:

How does the “frame” of the hand, in a naturally relaxed and curved shape contribute to the effectiveness of the fingers when engaging the string? Throughout this application exercise, pulling the string back, be aware of your hand’s shape - it should be relaxed and curved, only changing shape in negligible, tiny ways to facilitate the curvature and angle of the fingers. 

Application 2 - Sound.

So far, we’ve been pulling strings back into their playable position, but we have not been plucking them (or I have not drawn our attention to the sonic result). Let us now make sound!

As you pull the string back into the fretboard, give it a pluck. You should hear the same sound you’re accustomed to hearing, but the mechanism of engagement has changed.

Concept:

How much of this pulling pressure is required to make the string ‘activate’? There is room for experimentation in this application.

For the experimental exercise you are asked to do the following:
Pick a string and play on the 7th fret. 
Pluck the string continuously with a slow pulse. Strive to make each pick engagement the same. 
As you pluck continuously, change the left arm engagement pressure: meaning, pull the string down to its sounding position, and then release to its “non-sounding” position, making a quiet harmonic or clicking noise.
Alternate between them at a timed interval of your choosing, plucking continuously. 
Feel the change in your body, in your muscles. Are you keeping your weight in alignment? Are you resisting the habit of tensioning the hand when the time to make sound appears?

After doing this for a little while, we will introduce another element. So far, your exercise has been completed in a binary fashion - the string is either engaged or not-engaged. But why, with our human whims, wits, and wills must we be constrained by simple dichotomies? What if we could quantify degrees of engagement?

Experiment

Now, you’ll need to press “half-weight.” Imagine that we are bisecting the binary - if you press with “half-weight,” you’ll arrive at a sound somewhere between fully engaged and not engaged. That sound will not be immediately pleasurable, but it will be revealing. Pull at half-weight and get the buzzing sound of a string not-fully pressed.

This sound may remind you of when you began your guitar journey, or the sounds produced by an absolute beginner in your care as a student. These sounds may or may not bar aesthetically pleasing, according to one’s artistic goals and tastes, but they begin to codify in our physicality the possibility of weights beyond the on/off binary. These gradations, in which we could continue “halving” the perceived weight of engagement, could be pursued into infinity. But we won’t do that today. Instead, we will use this to ask ourselves:

“What is the minimum amount of weight required to engage the string in sound?” 

I hope that you’ve read this last part out loud. If not, you are encouraged to do just that. 

Experiment 2

Now, let us find the minimum weight. Engage in the same exercise as described in Experiment 1, but this time, switch between the half-weight, and the “sounding” press, where the note it produced as expected. 

What did you notice?

Perhaps, after many repetitions and reflection, you noticed suddenly that the production of sound requires far less effort than you may have previously thought, and tension in the hand is is no way correlated to the activation of the string in a sounding engagement. 

This is important. While this book perhaps reads from an academic tone, the knowledge here is not intended to merely reside in the mind as intellectual knowledge, but rather, as corporeal, tactile, embodied knowledge. You can “know” the techniques I’ve described with their possible outcomes, but to “understand” them is to codify this knowledge into your bones, sinews, and soft tissues. The knowing is found in the doing; to do is to know. 

Repeat these exercises on each finger, on different strings, at the 7th fret. 


End of Section.

Application 3.

We will now address the application exercise for Fundamental Motion 4. 

Exercise 1:
Choose a string.
Placed your index finger on the chosen string at the 7th fret. Keep the wrist neutral.
Without pressing the string (resting the finger on the string), slide the finger along the string maintaining physical contact with the string as you slide to fret 1, then up to fret 17. 
Focus your attention on the movement from the elbow and the resulting effect on the shape of the hand. What do you notice about the left hand knuckles? 

Observation.

The left hand knuckles seem to “rotate” as you slide up and down the neck. Recall that this fundamental motion is based on the rotation of the arm from the elbow - a motion that has been selected for and optimized. If you attempt to keep the knuckles facing the same direction throughout the motion, you’ll notice that either the elbow must lift or the wrist turn in an unwanted direction - neither of these options are appealing, as they add unnecessary tension to the mechanism of engagement. 

The knuckles, then, are always in alignment with the tip of the elbow. Observe as you slide that a straight line may always be drawn from the tip of the elbow to the left hand knuckles - they are in an alignment naturally and they wish to stay that way. 

Exercise  2.
Set up your hand as if you are going to engage with the string, but keep the fingers just above the strings. 
Move to the nut. 
Rotate the arm as if doing the sliding exercise, but do not permit the fingers to stay in contact with the string.
The arm should be drawing an arc-like shape as you rotate from the nut to frets beyond fret 12. 

In this exercise, we observe that the arm does create a clear arcing motion when the forearm rotates to enable the slide along the string. Of what consequence is this observation?

If we consider that the knuckles remain in alignment with the elbow throughout the motion, it should become clear to us that the angle of the weight pulled by the arm and back muscles changes along the hands motion on the finger board. That is, the pull we exert at fret 1 is NOT the same as the pull exerted at fret 7, and NOT the same as fret 15. Each pull at a different angle.

This convex arc formed by the natural motion of the hand over the straight-edge of the guitar neck is one of importance: it demonstrates that we cannot, when shifting, pull from a stationary position, but rather, we must allow the position of the elbow to allow pull along each point of the shift or slide. 

Exercise 3.
Re-engage the strings with the fingers.
Choose a finger and a string. 
Begin at fret 1, slide to fret 5, and then back to fret 1, keeping the sound going as you slide.  
As you go up and then down, focus on the rotation of the pull-weight throughout the exercise - the angle of pull changes with the position of the arm.
Begin adding two frets at a time, eventually sliding up and down the entire fretboard. Motions should be smooth, controlled, and IN the string, meaning, you should be pulling the string into the fretboard, pulling back in a line from the knuckles to the elbow.


Exercises for both hands together.
